---
title: "Lockdown is a class issue"
date: 2020-04-15
draft: false
tags: "Society"
shorttext: "Opinion critics' criticism of the corona lockdown is limited. This is no wonder, since they mostly belong to the well-off middle class."
cover: "society"
lang: en
---

The opinion makers ' criticism of the corona Lockdown is limited. This is no wonder, since you and your personal environment usually belong to a well-off bourgeoisie, which is hardly affected by the Lockdown personally. It makes a difference whether you use the sunny days as a pensioner or "Home Office Elite" to play in your own home in the green bacon belt with the children or grandchildren in the garden and find yourself or whether you have to spend as a single low-wage worker in forced short time with the children at closed playgrounds in the small two-room apartment in the Plattenbau. For millions of Germans, the Lockdown is not an extended spring holiday at home, but a psychological and economic tragedy and it would be desirable that these destinies finally play a greater role in a forced Exit debate.

As I walked through the streets this week, I felt a little like the Lord of the Rings trilogy in the shire. Like Happy Hobbits, my neighbors engaged in gardening and playing with their children. But you only see those in the light, those in the dark you mostly do not see in the contact barrier. There is a rift going through this country during the lockdown. On the Lockdown sunny side are – despite risk group membership – those retirees and retirees who could be described as economically independent, and all the officials and mostly senior employees who are allowed to do their currently coronabedingend rather less exciting Job from home. Facebook, Instagram and co. get excited about the toilet paper shortage, but otherwise you perceive the forced break rather as a whimsical home vacation. And as long as the weather plays along and the building and garden markets are open, there are certainly worse things in life; the pensions, pensions and salaries of these lucky ones are finally transferred on time and you finally have the time to take care of things that you do not get to in everyday working life and it is always exciting when something exciting happens. Of course one whines nevertheless; admittedly on a high level, but also this is nothing new. The main thing is that the beer and sausages do not go out.

A little further down the corona Lockdown ladder, the situation doesn't look quite rosy anymore. Those who, as self-employed or freelancers, have to cope with huge sales losses through the "measures" and do not know whether and how to proceed, will not perceive the Lockdown as an extended spring holiday, but rather as a massive, even existential threat. This applies above all to the approximately four million Solo self-employed, i.e. freelancers and micro-entrepreneurs who do not have employees. But also self-employed with employees, e.g. in gastronomy, retail or tourism, the Lockdown often hits the mark economically, and for all these people, the Exit debate is more than a virological simulation game, in which such "profane" things as the return to an orderly economic life play a minor role.

The situation is similar for the more than two million people who have so far been sent into short-time work by around half a Million companies and now have to forgo parts of their wages. Certainly, those who had a good wage before the crisis, were able to form reserves and have manageable financial burdens, will also be able to bridge this time. But how many people can do that in times of skyrocketing rents and stagnant wages? Here, too, it is above all those who, even without a crisis, are not on the sunny side of our economic system, at least in socio-economic terms. And with very many people, a wage waiver in the amount of a third is unfortunately enough, that the regular expenditure exceeds the regular income and where this leads without sufficient reserves, should be known. Since the weather can still be nice - those who are threatened with insolvency will rather wish that it storms and rains, the main thing is that life goes back to its usual course and the full pay comes back into the account.

Also in terms of quality of life, it looks completely different here – at the lower end of the corona Lockdown ladder-than in the bacon belt. If you do not have a garden to play with the children, and instead are locked up in a small two-room apartment with the offspring, the ceiling falls on your head after only a few days. What to do? The playgrounds are forbidden, the typical urban recreational activities for children are closed or forbidden. And since the day care centers and schools are also closed, the little ones must now be busy all day. You should not give them to grandma and grandpa-risk group. The account is empty, nerves are strained, social contacts are forbidden – a toxic mixture that often even leads to family violence.

But strangely enough, all these destinies very rarely play a role in the debate about a quick Exit and a sensible easing of "measures". You don't just see those in the light; those in the light are also the ones who write editorial articles and make opinions in the talk shows and comment formats. These editorials, of course, do not come from the "free" journalists, who otherwise earn their bread rolls with event or sports reports, and who, thanks to Lockdown, can no longer pay their rent. Carelessness is also a privilege that you have to be able to afford and if you stand on the top steps of the corona Lockdown ladder without worrying yourself, it is of course easy to sell the "good" advice of virologists as no alternative and to swear off the Rest of the country for further weeks or even months of restriction-the price you have to pay for it yourself is comparatively low. So what? Perhaps these editorials should exchange once a week with a single mother from the Plattenbau settlement. Perhaps you would then come to other answers in your careful consideration?
