---
title: "Peace is war"
date: 2019-11-25
tags: "state"
geo: "Europe"
draft: false
shorttext: "When the Troll Heiko Maas is celebrated by the media, we should all ask ourselves why? The SPD program know and competence do not fit on the Troll."
cover: "repression"
lang: en
---

The federal government is peace-oriented, guided by humanitarian human
Rightsand the UN Charter. The success is strengthened by the print
media, and the Public Propaganda Showns.

If it is for the power and the economic elites, then the German
government is ready for any murder. Then Merkel likes to pay a visit to
the hated Trump, after all, they all love each other at the end.

The public law are true to its own line and see themselves as the press
Department of the leading policy in the country, even if falsehoods are
proclaimed. The "accepted journalistic principles", made from the
broadcasting State treaty to the standard of reporting, are warped from
the Newsreel reality according to unknown. Even the speech bubbles of a
pubertal purulent late Konfirmanden in the Foreign Office are clubbed
into the audience without distance and without criticism, statements
even issued as facts.

Research, truth and the Position of two sides does not take place. Troll
Maas was allowed to blubber without consequence at a press conference:

> It affects our security interests in an elementary way. (...) We
> believe that Russia can save the treaty

The daily show came up with the idea to say, the Moment, Russia has
introduced the maintenance of the INF Treaty in the UN security Council,
this project was however blocked by the US and its NATO verse, all
without discussion. Merkel\'s hypocrisy Germany even ran ahead.

The fact that Germany\'s Nato Troll Maas accused Russia of failing is a
hallmark of German foreign policy. Their chief has not yet made a single
successful contribution to a peace-promoting international conflict
resolution. But our government expresses its determination to take "more
responsibility" worldwide.

Where Germany is then actually trying, as in Ukraine, since Germany is
making a mess. Is the have are we the 1940 years, anti-Russian stance, a
politician of the apes for Germany took the word race, sub-human, etc.
in the mouth, because diplomacy can\'t work. Only Russia at the Moment
has a functioning diplomatic foreign policy and is able to end the war
after Syria also in Ukraine.

In lightning thunderstorms, the will for peace and the readiness for
disarmament is hyped while being sabotaged behind the scenes. How does
this fit with a transparent democracy? For a long time, Germany is no
longer just the soulful companion in the wolf pack of the "Western
values community". The characters are on a new self-confidence to put
more and more responsibility militarily. 45 countries shot 800
"communications satellites" into space. Most of it belongs Of course
Hitler 2.0 also known as USA. Few are exclusively military, most are of
double benefit. It offers good services to the people and the military.
The Bundeswehr is present with the satellites in space.

{{< image srcwebp="/static/img/content/2019/260.webp" srcalt="/static/img/content/2019/260.jpg" title="" >}}

The war in space costs the taxpayer a billion euros, how this kind of
armor is to reconcile with the Basic Law =\> Defense remains a RÃ¤tzel.
As the conquest fantasies of Germany look like nobody learns, and the
"journalists" who contribute to the ignorance and the worship of the
peaceful Merkel.

With its military use of space, the federal government is already
violating the call of the United Nations General Assembly, which, by
Resolution a 51/123, strongly appealed to "all states, in particular the
leading space nations, to" actively contribute to the goal of preventing
an arms race in outer space". This Resolution, entitled 'International
Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of outer space', of 13 December 1996,
approved Germany.

{{< image srcwebp="/static/img/content/2019/261.webp" srcalt="/static/img/content/2019/260.jpg" title="" >}}

The German foreign policy is hypocritical, as NATO Secretary General
Jens Stoltenberg proves to be double-minded. At the end of June, boldly,
at a ministerial meeting, he claimed that his aggressive terrorist
organization was not about "militarizing space."But that\'s what it\'s
all about. The US and NATO are pursuing space strategy upgrades. They
want the possibility of war by attacking satellites or using weapons in
space.

Are you dealing with attack or defense? With the naked eye is from the
Earth not detectable, who is more popped up on Aggression and who more
on Defensive. But any thoughtful who avails himself of his mind, it can
be justified conjecture. It only requires a reconsideration of what
superpower has ridden most Wars.

The main thing, the Newsreel is offered a pop dance, which you can pick
up to the enemy:

> NATO representatives point out that China and Russia have tested the
> possibilities for interference or destruction of satellites. In
> October 2017, a Russian satellite was remarkably close to a
> French-Italian satellite for military communication. Paris then
> accused Moscow of espionage.

Years ago, the truth was another. NATO is a driving force in the
armament of Outer Space, Russia and China only react to this threat,
according to the federal government in 2003.

> The only remaining superpower is the USA .... challenged at all
> levels.... respond. They therefore set out, through their new security
> policy concepts and objectives, as well as their actions, the contents
> and pace of new developments that the other states are confronted
> with.

Today, on the other hand, Heiko Maas only works as a chief large flap:

> In April, when we took over the presidency of the United Nations
> Security Council, we also ensured that the issue of nuclear arms
> control was on the Security Council\'s agenda for the first time after
> seven years.

What do you think of mother earth, what would become of our future, if
we had our Heiko? The pure Grey:

> What sometimes sounds like Science Fiction, has long since become
> reality: supersonic weapons, Killer robots, or the militarization of
> space. The question of whether we are threatened not only by
> Megabombs, but also by Megabytes and everything (sic) that one can do
> with it. Our aim is to launch once again an international debate on
> how arms control could look like in the 21st century.

Fortunately, we have the all-round genius Maas. Otherwise, perhaps we
would not immediately notice how we are being loaded and how naive our
belief in collective security is-in this association of aggressive NATO
egoists and commanders of the military-industrial complex.

How beautiful: Maas called for a reduction of nuclear warheads in the UN
Security Council. A Window to speak of. Free from any new thought, a
real windy. What he asked for, Russia had already proposed a long time
ago: namely first of all to extend the contract "New START" by 5 years
until 2021. Washington, however, has not yet decided. A decision will
not be taken until February 2020.

On the childish profiling attempts of the German minister of foreign
affairs no one gives anything to the UN. But Maas is no one for the
international audience, but is the press secretary of the terrorist
organization NATO at the suspicious and war-torn home front. For these
businesses in Germany there are Maas and the Daily News.

When it came to the alleged commitment to Peace trick the Troll in New
York and joined the Phalanx of Western arms, supporters and Bellizisten.
Russia had tabled a Resolution on 5 November 2019 entitled "measures to
prevent an arms race in outer space". She demands that "... Continue
efforts to prevent the arms race, including the use of weapons in outer
space, in order to maintain international peace and strengthen global
security".

124 States, an overwhelming majority, supported this Resolution. 40
countries, including the USA, Israel, Germany, France and a number of
other European countries voted against it.

It goes without saying that the Daily News shed this message. The
leaders in the leading German media shut up. The Resolution does not fit
in her image of the "evil Russians". Alternative media addressed the
issue.

> very simple reason, that is, because it contained a comment on one of
> the experts in the expert panel, which, in our view, was completely
> inappropriate and inappropriate. A side swipe, a personal attack that,
> in our view, was not justified and had nothing to look for in this
> Resolution.

The speaker does not say what the comment was. The fits to the Maas and
his Berlin Entourage: An unjustified perceived comment against an
expert, a trifle, is this Minister more important than the thing itself,
namely, the prevention of further arms race in outer space, as the
overwhelming majority of the UN member States, desired and intended.

Alternatively, the government is decorated with foreign feathers. In its
annual disarmament report of 10 July 2019, it states: "the positive
assessment of 2018 includes that in October 2018, under German
coordination, an agreement was reached by all states parties on the
resumption of regular observation flights for the year 2019."

It was just not a German, but an OSCE project.

A further" tangible success "is attributed to the political actors in
the efforts to" worldwide control of small arms", although there are no
effective and binding regulations. Instead, the report is riddled with
Noble declarations of intent. They contrast with the federal
government\'s efforts to constantly increase military spending; with the
current annual rate of 50 billion US dollars, Germany is ranked 8th in
the world, just behind Russia (65 billion US dollars, 6th place). The US
is the leader with approximately \$ 700 billion.

The Troll of foreign ministers does not lose a single warning or
critical word about this.

There is no trace of peacefulness, as demonstrated by the ruthless
German export of arms; even warring parties and crisis areas are
delivered. By the end of September, export licences had risen by 75 per
cent year-on-year to 6.35 billion euros. As a result, the export volume
is approaching the previous record values from the years 2015 and 2016
of 7.86 and 6.85 billion euros, respectively.

Germany\'s democracy is defended wherever German weapons are used?

ARD-aktuell has reported on the aggressiveness though, but not in the
main TV programs, but completely hidden on tagesschau.de in the morning
at 5:00.

The popularity values of politicians, which are regularly published,
show how perfectly the German foreign ministers manage to express
themselves in the media as a peace Apostle. The demoscopic mischief,
thought for conditioning the mass taste, is already a Tradition. He has
proven himself as a narcotic of individual judgment: the respective
foreign minister receives high recognition, even if there is no
objective reason. This has not changed since war criminals "Joschka"
Fischer\'s high-altitude flights on the shabby popularity scale.

As a rule, the victims of the poll, who were hit by opinion researchers,
do not have a sound knowledge of the activities of a foreign minister
and of his diplomatic staff. Solid Information will be withheld from you
on the media side. Ergo, you cannot give a factual judgment. This is all
the more reason why they are more willing to give up their own opinion
on what the state-run media have done to them. Influenced by German
self-righteousness, "We are Good"!

Only in this way can an external minister, despite wrong decisions and
incompetence, stay at the top of the popularity scale, usually right
behind Chancellor Merkel. Heiko Maas it was first reserved to initiate
the turnaround in the trend. The number of those who are" satisfied with
his work \" decreases. His reputation has also declined significantly
according to the last ZDF survey.

Which foreign "influencers" have their fingers in the game, can be
guessed. Contrary to what Maas once tried to do right, he is accused of,
but not, because he also did not fail: seeking compromise in the dispute
over the nuclear deal with Iran, instead of the usual unrestricted
support for Israel.

He is also accused of publicly denouncing his internal Coalition
conflicts. The Greens complain that Europe is suffering from German
"leadership weakness", that an EU military mission does not always need
a mandate from the UN Security Council. What has it done to
international law?

It would have deserved verbal beating in the Foreign Office for
completely different reasons than those accused of being accused of
right-wing and NATO corner. At the moment, he has missed the Chance to
stand up against the brute interference of the US in South America and
for the respect of the UN Charter.

Instead, he cheered in front of the fascist-killed Brazilian blast Jair
Bolsonaro and even dropped their trifles in connection with the fires on
the Amazon. He was the first president of the United States to be
elected as president of the United States, and was the first president
of the United States to be elected as president of the United States by
the U.S. State Department and the CIA, while the democratically elected
NicolÃ¡s Maduro was still in office.

{{< image srcwebp="/static/img/content/2019/262.webp" srcalt="/static/img/content/2019/262.jpg" title="" >}}

Even more preposterous is the handling of German foreign policy and the
media, with the President Evo Morales and the coup d\'Ã©tat in Bolivia.
The man is slipped out of office and was just in time on an adventurous
Route to be flown by the Mexican Air Force to asylum. The Daily News,
however, seems to her audience that Morales had not been overthrown by
force, but had resigned and fled under the pressure of the masses, but
on his own decision.

In such subtly falsifying News Design, the incomprehensible fact that
the poor and mostly indigenous population of Bolivia is defending
themselves against Homicide and fire attacks, while the rich white Elite
is one of the Hievt their presidential office and a unopposed, racist
fascist at all previous elections, the systematic Maidanization
according to known US recipe operates. Nine dead reported tagesschau.de
on 17 November at noon, even though South American media had long since
reported officially confirmed 23 deaths. In fact, much more victims were
to be feared.

Is our great peace campaigner and foreign minister protesting?

No. Even if he has to take note that the Bolivian Congress has condemned
Morales detachment as a coup d\'Ã©tat, the him pressed resignation not
accepted, and his office has confirmed? Even if he hears, that this
Congress does not want to accept the seizure of power by a
self-proclaimed transitional President? Assigned our top politicians
Maas submit once, his Ambassador Stefan Twin, the coup in La Paz,
Germany\'s dismay about the colonialist return to the feudalism of the
money aristocracy and the bloodshed?

Not the track. The coup against a socialist in Bolivia cannot shake a
Maas. It\'s all about access to our Lithium in Bolivia! The indigenous
people themselves were part of the Morales after he had approved one or
the other Lithium project.

The new, arbitrarily appointed Bolivian cabinet is continuously white
and Indigenous-free. This, of course, guarantees further fighting. The
Federal Republic of Germany, with its party foundations and aid
institutions, is one of the uncontested co-debtors in addition to the
United States.

> Indigenous Population Groups ... Their ability to fully participate in
> a sustainable development-oriented approach to their country has so
> far been limited due to economic, social and historical factors.
> (Agenda 21, Ch. 26)

Maas is also strengthening his back against the reactionary Chilean
President SebastiÃ¡n PiÃ±era, who has been brutally fought mass
demonstrations against and his fascist billionaire Clique for weeks.
Chile\'s billionaires have the power to dispose of enormous copper
deposits, which were still under state control at the time of socialist
President Salvador Allende.

Meanwhile, Heiko Maas has formally recognized the coup President of
Bolivia, Jeanine ÃÃ±ez, as "interim president". As already after the
ridiculous and rapid "recognition" of the coupist GuaidÃ³, the scientific
service of the Bundestag should attest to the Minister even in the new
case a clear violation of international law.

But that doesn\'t bother Maas. He knows Chancellor Merkel and US
President Trump behind him, because it does not need consideration of
the UN Charter. ÃÃ±ez expressed his gratitude in Berlin and issued a
decree to her Bolivian army to license them to murder. In" restoration
of internal order", the military were\"exempt from criminal
responsibility". This, too, obviously does not disturb our Berlin
Regime.

{{< image srcwebp="/static/img/content/2019/263.webp" srcalt="/static/img/content/2019/263.jpg" title="" >}}

This is the social Heiko. This is how they are, these governing special
Democrats: a pact with the white elites always give preference to the
right-wing approach to people-bound and people-elected presidents. A
Maas knows what to expect from him at home: that "Germany finally takes
responsibility". Perhaps with "hard military policy instead of usual
Softpower".

Obviously, not even a Maas is destructive enough for our German
plutocrats and does not do justice to their desire for ruthless power
politics, pressure and global influence. The fact that he is now
"written down" has earned him, but not for these shameful reactionary
reasons, but because he is patently opportunistic, chaotic and
irresponsible politics to answer.

It is striking that the criticism of the corporate media exclusively
adheres to Maas, while Chancellor Merkel once again remains spared. It
is that at the end of the Grand coalition of CDU/CSU and SPD and the
Merkel-Union springs has to leave, but the SPD with your disenchanted
political Kasper Heiko Maas.

Poor Germany! Gloomy prospects of a government that wants to fluffed
moralises like the Bathing in the Catholic rectory and "more
responsibility", a popular phrase power-hungry militarists and arms
suppliers. There\'s something coming up for us. However, the Newsreel
will give it to its audience as a patriotic nationalism. Paternal blasts
make reactionary relapses always impression, be it when exporting
weapons, when breathing life in Mali or when complicity in war crimes in
Syria.

Peace policy? Don\'t pay. Basta! Even if the majority of the population
still wants it so much. Where would we go if it were this majority?

The Source you find in original [post](https://silviosiefke.de/blog/2019/11/25/frieden-ist-krieg/ "The Original Sources").
