---
title: "New York Times is not a reference"
date: 2020-07-31
draft: false
tags: "Media"
shorttext: "An American historian shows how often the NYT has been misinformed in the field of US foreign policy."
cover: "media"
lang: en
---

Without fear or favor." That’s one of the hallowed mottos of The New York Times, first enshrined by its modern founder, Adolph Ochs, more than a century ago. But today a more fitting motto would be "With fear and favor." In recent years the Times has abandoned its own high standards of journalistic objectivity and committed itself to relentless, hyper-partisan demonization of Russia as a deadly threat to America.

The [sensational story](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/26/us/politics/russia-afghanistan-bounties.html "Russia Secretly Offered Afghan Militants Bounties to Kill U.S. Troops, Intelligence Says") that Russia paid bounties for the killing of American soldiers in Afghanistan is just the most recent example. The Times articles were based on anonymous intelligence officials’ statements about interrogations of captured Taliban militants or criminals in Afghanistan. The National Security Agency [strongly dissented](https://www.wsj.com/articles/nsa-differed-from-cia-others-on-russia-bounty-intelligence-11593534220 "NSA Differed From CIA, Others on Russia Bounty Intelligence") from the reported intelligence assessment. The Pentagon, which used a route across Russia to supply US forces in Afghanistan, [said](https://thehill.com/policy/defense/505164-pentagon-no-corroborating-evidence-to-validate-bounty-allegations "Pentagon: 'No corroborating evidence' yet to validate troop bounty allegations") that it "has no corroborating evidence" to validate the allegations. The Taliban indignantly denied the claims. George Beebe, former head of Russia analysis at the CIA, and constitutional lawyer David Rivkin [argued](https://thehill.com/opinion/national-security/505804-why-we-need-a-little-skepticism-and-more-evidence-on-russian "Why we need a little skepticism, and more evidence, on Russian bounties") that the sources for the story were not very credible, particularly because the Afghan government, which oversaw the interrogations, had a clear motive: It "desperately wants the U.S. military to remain in Afghanistan." By July 7, even the Times [belatedly acknowledged](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/07/opinion/russia-bounty-afghanistan-trump.html "Don’t Let Russian Meddling Derail Afghanistan Withdrawal Plans") that "there’s a lot missing from the reports that Russia paid for attacks on American and other coalition forces in Afghanistan." It then urged that "emotions and politics be kept at bay," yet it was the Times itself that had inflamed emotions and stoked partisan controversy.

Maybe one day the dubious allegations will be proven true. Until then, anonymous intelligence officials must not be allowed to drive public discussion of US policy regarding Russia by leaking statements made by drug smugglers or Islamists under interrogation. We should remember how distorted intelligence has misled us before. False intelligence about weapons of mass destruction paved the way to the catastrophic war in Iraq in 2003. False claims about a Soviet combat brigade in Cuba torpedoed ratification of the SALT II Treaty in 1979. False reports of North Vietnamese attacks on US warships in the Tonkin Gulf led Congress to give President Lyndon Johnson a blank check for waging the disastrous war in Vietnam. The New York Times infamously assisted the George W. Bush administration’s [dishonest](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/16/magazine/colin-powell-iraq-war.html "Colin Powell Still Wants Answers") selling of the war in Iraq, initially backed demands for the dismantling of the supposed Soviet combat brigade in Cuba, and supported Johnson’s retaliation against the alleged North Vietnamese attacks.

Disregarding all that past experience, journalists, politicians, and foreign policy experts have simply assumed that the claims of Russian bounties are true and called for action. Speaker Nancy Pelosi jumped to the conclusion that in revenge for the humiliation of the Soviet Union in Afghanistan more than 30 years ago, Russia was "taking it out on us, our troops." Senator Ben Sasse demanded a plan for putting Russian military intelligence officers "in body bags." On the op-ed page of the Times, former national security adviser Susan Rice [declared](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/30/opinion/trump-russia-afghanistan.html "Why Does Trump Put Russia First?") that President Donald Trump’s failure to order a response to "Russian efforts to slaughter American troops in cold blood" confirmed that the president was "actively advancing our arch adversary’s nefarious interests."

Such reckless jingoism reflects the cumulative impact of a long campaign by American media. The demonization of Russia is driven by the desire to deflect attention from misconduct by the United States, to affirm American moral superiority in contrast to Russian depravity, and to smear domestic political opponents by associating them with Russia.

The campaign [began](https://raritanquarterly.rutgers.edu/38-1-foglesong "Putin: From Soulmate to Archenemy") in the first years of the century, when American journalists attributed the brutality of the Russian war against rebels in Chechnya to the fundamental ethos of its military and the moral callousness of Vladimir Putin (while in the same years American atrocities in Iraq were blamed on mistakes and "bad apples"). It expanded after Putin denounced the "almost uncontained hyper-use of force" by the United States during a speech in Munich in 2007. It escalated further in 2008, after Georgian forces attacked South Ossetia, killing Russian peacekeepers, and Russia’s counterattack was depicted by the American press as an unprovoked "invasion." Putin, the Times declared, was "the dark hand behind Russia’s aggression."

Since the election of 2016 the campaign has been even more relentless, with the Times persistently promoting stories that the Trump team colluded with Putin in a sinister plot to defeat Hillary Clinton. The Times led readers to expect that special prosecutor Robert Mueller would establish the conspiracy beyond a reasonable doubt. When Mueller’s long-awaited report actually did not confirm the collusion story, the Times was left "a little tiny bit flat footed," as Executive Editor Dean Baquet put it in a town-hall meeting with Times staff published by Slate in August 2019.

Yet the paper goes on portraying Trump as Putin’s puppet, disregarding the numerous actions by Trump contrary to Russia’s interests, including attacking Russia’s ally Syria with cruise missiles in April 2017, sending Javelin anti-tank missiles to Ukraine, trying to overthrow the government of Venezuela (a Russian client), withdrawing from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, resisting Russian appeals to extend the New START Treaty, and abrogating the agreement to constrain Iran’s nuclear program (which Russia helped the Obama administration to achieve). Just this week The Washington Post reported that Trump ordered "a covert cyberattack against Russia’s Internet Research Agency" in 2018. While the Trump administration’s imposition of new economic sanctions on Russia stemmed from pressure from Congress, the other actions are a result of Trump’s bellicose, unilateralist, "America first" nationalism. Trump is an utterly selfish, impulsive, uncontrollable blowhard and bully. He is nobody’s puppet.

This year, as the coronavirus pandemic has afflicted the United States much more than any other country, the Times has repeatedly [mocked and disparaged](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/07/world/europe/oligarchs-russia-coronavirus.html "As Local Health Systems Buckle, Russia’s Oligarchs Take Charge") Putin’s [handling of the crisis](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/03/world/europe/russia-coronavirus-small-business.html "As Putin Dallies, Russia’s Small Businesses Are Withering Away") in Russia. In April the Times even published a [lengthy article](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/13/science/putin-russia-disinformation-health-coronavirus.html "Putin’s Long War Against American Science"), "Putin’s Long War Against American Science," that blamed the outbreak in the United States at least in part on Putin. The article presented no evidence to support its insinuation and even acknowledged that Putin has actually "been a staunch proponent of vaccines" in Russia. Yet it nonetheless charged that he had spread health misinformation for more than a decade, thereby encouraging "the spread of deadly illnesses."

With the presidential election approaching, partisan politics have played even more important roles in distorted stories concerning Russia. The Times has appeared to favor Biden not only against Trump but also against his earlier Democratic rival Bernie Sanders. In March, when Sanders still seemed likely to win the Democratic presidential nomination, the Times [published](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/05/world/europe/bernie-sanders-soviet-russia.html "As Bernie Sanders Pushed for Closer Ties, Soviet Union Spotted Opportunity") an outrageous story that claimed Sanders had been a vodka-downing dupe of Soviet propaganda when he visited the communist country to develop a sister-city relationship between Burlington, Vt., and Yaroslavl. The breathless Times correspondent who ballyhooed the story neglected to mention that at the exact same time that Sanders was in Russia, President Ronald Reagan, who strongly supported citizen exchanges, was in Moscow, strolling on Red Square with Mikhail Gorbachev and declaring that because of Gorbachev’s dramatic reforms, he no longer considered the Soviet Union an "evil empire."

By printing such smears, the Times and other papers not only exacerbate the political polarization and cynicism about the liberal media in the United States. They also shred the reputation of the American press among Russian liberals and journalists who earlier admired its independence and integrity. As Nadezhda Azhgikhina, a veteran Russian journalist and executive director of PEN Moscow, has explained, "Russiagate killed the beautiful dream of the perfection of the US system of government, respect for the law, and the excellence of the US press."
