---
title: "Betrayal of Russia"
date: 2019-08-30
tags: "State"
shorttext: "With all the Power of the USA to push Europe and Russia into a dangerous confrontation."
cover: "repression"
draft: false
lang: en
---

In his report on the Russian affair, special investigator Robert Mueller concluded that Donald Trump and his campaign camp did not reach secret agreements with Russia during the presidential campaign. Nevertheless, there is little evidence that the new Cold war with Moscow subsides. Instead, it is used to legitimise the expansion of NATO to the borders of Russia, bringing billions of dollars to arms manufacturers in the US and Europe.

In addition, it allows local critics and alternative media to demonize as agents of a foreign power. It also serves to conceal the betrayal of the Democratic Party in the working class and the dependence of this party on powerful corporations, discredit the Détente between the two largest nuclear powers in the world, and justify the restriction of civil rights in the United States and Nato interventions abroad.

This new Cold war began even before the presidential campaign, Donald trump's: He was created over a decade ago of a war, industry and intelligence circles, who had recognized that you consolidate through the aggravation of conflict with Russia, their Power and their profits would increase to seventy per cent of the work of the American intelligence service is provided by private companies, such as [Booz Allen Hamilton](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/07/us/booz-allen-hamilton-nsa.html "At Booz Allen, a Vast U.S. Spy Operation, Run for Private Profit"), which is considered most profitable spy organization in the world.

"That started long before Trump and Russiagate," said Stephen F. Cohen when I interviewed him for my TV show On Contact. Cohen is emeritus Professor of politics at Princeton University, where he was head of Russian studies, and emeritus Professor of Russian studies and history at New York University.

{{< youtube "wc94DRFCik" >}}

"You have to wonder why Washington had no Problem maintaining productive diplomatic relations with communist leaders of the Soviet Union. Do you remember Richard Nixon and [Leonid Brezhnev](https://www.u-s-history.com/pages/h1883.html "Leonid Brezhnev")? It was a feast of love. They went hunting together. But then comes a post-Soviet head of government who is not only a communist, but even a professing anti-communist. Washington has been hating him since 2003, 2004. There must be an explanation. Why do we prefer Communist heads of State in Russia to the acting anti-communist head of government? It's a mystery."

"If you want to try to explain why the Washington Establishment is dealing with Putin in such hateful and demonic ways, you have to go back to the 1990s, before Putin's time," explains Cohen, who recently wrote his new [book](https://www.simonandschuster.com/books/War-with-Russia/Stephen-F-Cohen/9781510745810 "War with Russia From Putin & Ukraine to Trump & Russiagate") "War with Russia From Putin & Ukraine to Trump & Russiagate".

"The first post-Soviet head of government is [Boris Yeltsin](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Boris-Yeltsin "Boris Yeltsin"). Clinton is president. And they had this seemingly so good relationship and Pseudo-friendship, while the Clinton administration actually took advantage of the fact that Russia was about to collapse. The country almost lost its sovereignty. I lived there in the 90s. Middle-class people lost their jobs. Older people lost their pension. I think it is true to say that industrial productivity declined more than it did during our Great Depression in the 1990s. It was the worst economic and social Depression ever in peacetime. For Russia, it was a disaster."

In September 1993, the Russian citizens took to the streets to protest against the economic collapse and against the rampant corruption that has led to state-owned companies were sold against lush kickbacks and bribes for ridiculous fees to Russian [oligarch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russian_oligarch "Russian Oligarch") and foreign corporations. They protested against the food and fuel shortage, the non-payment of wages and pensions, the lack of basic services, including health care, the decrease in life expectancy, the explosive increase in the number of violent crimes and against Yeltsin's increasing authoritarianism and his unpopular war with Chechnya.

In October 1993 Yelzin ordered the bombing of the parliament building by army tanks when it was occupied by Democratic protesters. The attack claimed 2,000 deaths. Nevertheless, Yeltsin was exuberantly praised and supported by Washington during his presidency.

This included the fact that during its 1996 re-election campaign, the United States was in favour of granting Russia a loan of $ 10.2 billion from the International Monetary Fund. The loan made it possible for Yeltsin's government to pay huge sums of arrears in wages and pensions to millions of Russians, with checks often arriving on the eve of the election. In addition, an estimated $ 1.5 billion from the loan was used to directly finance Yeltsin's presidential campaign. However, when Yelzin was forced out of office in December 1999, his approval rate had fallen to 2 percent. Washington, after losing Yeltsin, went on a search for another malleable Russian leader and initially thought that he had found one in Putin.

"Putin traveled to Texas," said Cohen. "He met George Bush Junior for a Barbecue. Bush said he looked Putin in the eye and saw a good soul. There was this honeymoon moment between the two. So why did Washington turn against Putin? Because it turned out he wasn't like Yeltsin. There is a very [interesting article](https://www.nytimes.com/2004/12/15/opinion/the-poison-puzzle.html "The Poison Puzzle") by Nicholas Kristof, a columnist of the New York Times. This, wrote his own disillusion in regard to Putin was that he had not proved to be a [sober](https://www.history.com/news/bill-clinton-boris-yeltsin-drunk-1994-russian-state-visit "When a Russian President Ended Up Drunk and Disrobed Outside the White House") Yeltsin. Washington had hoped for a submissive and pleasing post-Soviet leader; a younger, healthier and non-alcoholic version of Yeltsin. They thought they found him in Putin. After all, Yeltsin had helped him to the power.

"As Putin began to speak about Russia's sovereignty, and Russia's independent course in world Affairs, they were horrified," said Cohen about the Washington elites. "It was not what they had expected. Since then, I believe that we were lucky enough that after the 1990's Putin became president. The competitors, who were already in the starting blocks, were of the worst kind. I knew some of them. I don't want to name names. But some of these guys were really brutal people. Putin was in some ways the right Person for this time, both for Russia and for its World Political Affairs."

"This has been happening for the past three years," Cohen said about the Russian Agate affair. "We've lost sight of what these allegations really are about. For almost three years now, those who invented Russian agates have secretly claimed that the president of the United States is a Russian Agent or that he was at least manipulated by the Kremlin. We laugh because it's so absurd. But Washington's Establishment took it seriously."

"I don't know if there has ever been such a thing in American history," Cohen noted. "The accusations hurt our own institutions, the presidency, our electoral system, Congress, the American Mainstream media. Not to mention the damage they have done to Russian-American relations, or the negative image of Russian citizens today of the United States. This whole Russiagate story was not just cheating, it's a disaster."

"During the 20th century there were three major phases of Détente," Cohen said. "The first after the death of Stalin, under the Republican President Dwight Eisenhower during a very delicate Moment of the Cold war. The second was conducted by Richard Nixon under the guidance of Henry Kissinger with Leonid Brezhnev, the third and most successful by Ronald Reagan and [Mikhail Gorbachev](https://edition.cnn.com/2013/01/11/world/europe/mikhail-gorbachev---fast-facts/index.html "Mikhail Gorbachev Fast Facts"). The policy of relaxation seemed so successful at the time that Reagan's successor Bush Senior claimed that the Cold War was over forever."

"The wall had fallen," said Cohen about the collapse of the GDR and the fall of the Berlin wall in 1989.

"Germany was in a process of reunification. The question arises as to where a united Germany would be. The West wanted Germany in NATO. For Gorbachev, this was an unthinkable trade. In the Second World War, 27.5 million Soviet citizens had died on the Eastern Front. In contrast to the nonsense we are told, the US did not end up in Normandy and defeated Hitler Germany. No, the defeat of Nazi Germany was mainly caused by the Soviet army. How could Gorbachev have gone home and said: 'Germany is reunited. That's great. And it will be in NATO‘. That was impossible. The Western allies promised Gorbachev that NATO would not move a centimetre to the East', should he agree to the accession of a reunited Germany to join NATO. In other words, NATO would not move from Germany to Russia. And she did."

"Meanwhile, NATO has marched to Russia's Borders," said Cohen. "From the Baltic to Ukraine to the former Soviet republic of Georgia. So, what happened? NATO later claimed that Gorbachev lied or that he misunderstood. She claimed that the promise had never been made. But the National Security Archive in Washington has submitted all the documents of the 1990 negotiations. Not only President Bush, but French head of government François Mitterrand and British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher made oral assurances. All Western heads of State promised Gorbachev that NATO would not move east."

"What is today the result of all this?"asked the Russian expert. "Betrayal. In any debate about the Russian-American relations, an informed Russian will say today: 'We fear that you will us betray'... Putin said he had illusions about the West, when he came to Power."

"Then Trump comes out of nowhere in 2016 and says, 'I think we should cooperate with Russia', says Cohen. "This is an explanation of the Détente. That's what drew my attention to him. From that point on, the talk began that Trump was an agent of the Kremlin. One wonders whether this claim has been put into the world somewhere in high circles, by US Americans who did not want a pro-relaxation President. And whether they thought that they could not really suffer Trumps talk about a cooperation with Russia at all, so low his chances of an electoral victory at the time also seemed. In any case, the events that we call Russia have been set in motion."

"The Founding Fathers of the policy of relaxation were Republicans," Cohen stressed. "The behavior of Democrats in times of Détente was very different. There was then the so-called Henry Jackson Wing: an uncompromising, ideological wing of the Democratic Party that did not believe in the policy of relaxation. Other Democrats, in turn, did. I lived in Moscow for many years, both during the Soviet era and after. Speaking with Russian-Soviet politicians, they generally say they prefer Republican candidates for the presidency."

"The Democrats are perceived by Russian leaders as more ideologically oriented," says Cohen.

"The Republicans are usually entrepreneurs who want to do business in Russia," he said. "The main Pro-Détente lobby organization, which was founded in the 1970s, was called American Committee for East-West Accord. It was founded by US company leaders who wanted to do business in Soviet Russia."

"US relations with Russia are more important than any other," Cohen continued. "Not just because of nuclear weapons. Russia is the largest country in the world. It borders on all the regions we are concerned about. Détente with Russia is essential. And yet something happened in 2016."

According to Cohen, the repeated accusations from former Directors of the U.S. foreign secret services concerning the alleged control of the Kremlin and the alleged Russian interference in the US elections is deeply disturbing. James Clapper, former director of the National Security Agency (NSA), and John Brennan, former director of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), described Trump as an "asset" of the Kremlin. Brennan called Trumps 'appearance at a press conference with the Russian president in Finland 'nothing but betrayal'.

In his memoirs "Facts and Fears: Hard Truths From a Life in Intelligence”, Clapper claims that Putin's interference in the 2016 presidential election was "shocking." 

"Of course, Russian efforts have influenced the outcome of the elections," says Clapper. "And to their own surprise they were able to sway the choice of a victory of Trumps. Another conclusion would exceed the limits of logic, common sense and credibility. Less than 80,000 votes resulted in a turnaround in the election. However, I have no doubt that even more votes have been influenced by the massive efforts of the Russians."

Brennan and Clapper have already lied to the public in various situations. Brennan, for example, denied the fact that the CIA monitored computers used by Senate staff to produce a torture report. The president of the Secret Service Committee of the US Senate, Dianne Feinstein, took the floor in a Senate Assembly and accused Brennan and the CIA of possible constitutional violations and criminal activities, to spy on and block the investigations of their committee, the subject of which was the use of torture by the CIA. She described the Situation as a "crucial Moment" for the control of American secret services.

Brennan also claimed that there had been "no collateral murder" during the drone war in Pakistan and that Osama bin Laden had used his wife as a human shield before being shot down in a US attack in Pakistan. Last but not least, the former CIA chief insisted that torture had brought valuable insights. None of these statements is true.

At the time of the US Invasion in Iraq, Clapper was head of the National Geospatial Intelligence Agency, the Pentagon's authority responsible for the analysis and investigation of spy satellite photos, air particles and soil samples. He spanned the history of Saddam Hussein's non-existent weapons of mass destruction and the documents with which he legitimized his plans for Syria on the eve of the Invasion. In addition, he committed an unbroken perjury before the Senate when he was questioned about the US public's internal surveillance programs. On the question "Does the NSA collect in any way data about millions or hundreds of millions of US Americans?"Clapper answered," No, Sir. ... Not knowingly."This was, as the former NSA chief knew very well, a [lie](https://eu.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2018/01/19/james-clappers-perjury-dc-made-men-dont-get-charged-lying-congress-jonathan-turley-column/1045991001/ "James Clapper's perjury, and why DC made men don't get charged for lying to Congress").

Our inability to oversee or control senior intelligence officials and their authorities inventing information to enforce certain agendas defined by the shadow state announces the death of democracy. It is above all the secret service officers with the apparent authority to lie, those instruments of Surveillance, intimidation and coercion are available. This effectively silences critics, even blunders investigations of their activities within the government, and makes them and their authorities inviolable.

"There is the" [Steele Dossier](/static/downloads/Trump-Intelligence-Allegations.pdf "Steele Dossier")", which spoofed around in the American Media, " Cohen said about Christopher Steele's secret report on alleged contacts Donald Trumps with Russia. The report was commissioned by the [Fusion GPS](https://www.influencewatch.org/for-profit/fusion-gps/ "Fusion GPS") Detective Agency and paid for by Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign and the National Organization of the Democratic Party. [Bob Woodward](https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/news/bob-woodward-steele-dossier-appeared-in-draft-of-us-intel-assessment-on-russian-meddling "Bob Woodward: Steele dossier appeared in draft of US intel assessment on Russian meddling") reported that Brennan urged to include the" Steele Dossier " in the assessment of the Russian electoral intervention by the US intelligence services.

"He (Steele) has everything from the American media," said Cohen. "I strongly doubt that he had a single Russian source. Then Steele presents this Dossier, and claimed: 'I have information from high level sources.'The Clinton campaign finances this measure. But Steele is an important figure. He is an employee of the British Secret Service, which was active in Russia and directed Russian cases. He says he has this Information that Trump is having sex with prostitutes. That Trump was corrupted decades ago. He had this from' high-ranking ' sources of the Kremlin. This is absurd and illogical."

"According to the theory, Putin wanted to make Trump the president at all costs," Cohen explained. "And then the people in the Kremlin, Putin's people, must have defamed Trump in front of a guy named Steele. Although the Boss wants something completely different, does that make any sense to you?".

"Why is that important?"he asked. "Well, right-wing American media, in particular Fox News, are blaming Russia today for this whole Russiagate thing. They say that Russia has passed false information on to Steele and that has fed it into our System, which has led to Russian agates. That's not true."

"Who's behind all this? Also behind the Operation, Steele?", Cohen wondered. "I prefer a good question to an Orthodox answer. I'm not dogmatic. I don't have any evidence. But all the superficial information suggests that Brennan and the CIA, called the life. Long before it shattered America. One Problem nowadays is that everyone is dredging the FBI. [Lover](https://nypost.com/2018/06/14/texts-reveal-disgraced-fbi-agent-told-lover-well-stop-trump/ "Texts reveal disgraced FBI agent told lover ‘we’ll stop’ Trump") writing e-Mails.

But the FBI is an effeminate organization, no one is afraid of the FBI. It's not what it was once under J. Edgar Hoover. Damn, you just have to look at James Comey. He's a funny figure. Brennan and Clapper faked him, they dumped the whole thing with him. Comey couldn't even handle Mrs. Clinton's e-Mails. He screwed up everything. And who were the smart guys? Brennan and Clapper. The former head of the CIA and the latter head of the NSA, whose task is actually to oversee these two authorities."

"Is there anything at all about these 'Russiagate' accusations against Trump and Putin?"asked the emeritus Professor. "Did our intelligence services think it all up? Investigations are now being announced, even by the United States Minister of Justice. You all want to check the FBI. It should be examined what Brennan and the CIA have done. This is the worst scandal in American history, or at least since the civil war. We need to know how it all started. If our intelligence agencies are moving so far outside the law that they can try to destroy a presidential candidate, and later President, we need to know! And I don't care that it's Trump, the next time it might be Harry Smith or a woman."

Cohen stated that George W. Bush Junior retired in 2002 from the Russian-American Treaty on the limitation of missile defense systems (ABM Treaty). "It was a very important contract. He limited the use of Defensive weapons. If one of the two great powers had a functioning missile defense, it could have come up with the idea of a nuclear first strike, without having to fear the retaliation of each other. Once Bush terminated the contract, we started building a missile defense shield around Russia. That was very dangerous."

"Last year we learned of [a new missile program](https://www.cnbc.com/2019/02/20/putin-confirms-tsirkon-russian-hypersonic-cruise-missile.html "Putin confirms development of Russia’s hypersonic cruise missile called Tsirkon") that the Russians have developed," he said.

"Hypersonic weapons. Russia now has nuclear missiles that can evade any missile defense system. We are at a new and the most dangerous point to date in a 50-year nuclear arms race. Putin said: 'We have developed these rockets in response to your actions. We can destroy each other.'The time for a new, comprehensive arms control agreement is now. And what do we get? Russian Agate. It is one of the greatest threats to national security. In my book, I have five [listed](https://www.thenation.com/article/russia-is-not-the-no-1-threat-or-even-among-the-top-5/ "Russia Is Not the 'No. 1 Threat' or Even Among the Top 5"). Russia and China are not involved. Russia is ranked first."

