---
title: "Neoliberalism reloaded"
date: 2019-11-29
tags: "Society"
shorttext: "The defeats of socialist governments like Bolivia are also due to the fact that they only half-heartedly started their Revolution."
draft: false
lang: en
cover: "society"
---

In several Latin American countries we are currently experiencing a
Rollback, a reversal of already achieved social progress. The womb, from
the neoliberal and fascist elites of the past crawled is still fertile.
It turns out that the exponents of the "20th century socialism", which
started with many hopes, have underestimated the persistence of their
opponents. One major mistake was that politicians like Evo Morales have
stopped halfway through the upheavals that began. The ownership
relationships were not questioned in principle, old associations
continued to operate in secret, international solidarity could not be
sufficiently activated. 11 reasons for the failure of several socialist
experiments, 11 things that can be done better next time.

{{< image srcwebp="/static/img/content/2019/277.webp" srcalt="/static/img/content/2019/277.jpg" title="Bolivia" >}}

> A half Revolution is always followed by a whole counter-revolution.

Is it not time for the left to draw conclusions from the politically
negative changes in Latin and Central America, in Venezuela, Ecuador,
Brazil, Bolivia, El Salvador, possibly Uruguay? Almost it looks like a
triumph of "neo-liberalism reloaded", which also involves a departure
from the positive agreements on regional fair cooperation and
cooperation such as ALBA, Unasur, PetroCaribe in favor of subordination
to the interests of the U.S. empire.

We wish all the current protest movements, the Maximum success. Because
they are an expression of the resistance of large parts of the
population in Latin America against oppression and social deprivation.
Much of what has been reached from the left or centre-left governments
in this Millennium, is inspiring and deeply impressive. It is all the
more necessary to think about the failure of government participation.
The conditions and constellations in the individual countries are
certainly different, but we raise the question: Are there common
Lessons? We see the following.

1.  after the takeover of government by left or centre-left governments,
    ownership has not been raised in any country for both the economy
    and agriculture (land reform to eliminate large land ownership). The
    previously politically powerful remained the economically powerful,
    their power base was not removed. This also applies, and especially
    to trade groups. Where fundamental changes were started, they were
    quickly diluted and discontinued by the pressure of the economically
    powerful. A strategy to create a constellation of forces that allows
    or makes possible a transfer of ownership to those who create all
    values was and is not recognizable.

2.  The Extractivism in some countries has led to a development of the
    national Economy, the tax revenues were spent for social progress
    --- so welcome that --- but for a national long-term independent
    economic development. "Buen vivir" remained a buzzword for Sunday
    speeches. Especially in Venezuela, which also tends to be in other
    countries, was not taken leave of a pension economy.

3.  The media remain the vast majority in the hands of the old
    capitalist owners, a democratization and decentralization of the
    media took place only partially and not related to the Central
    bourgeois or conservative media.

4.  The new left governments developed their own bureaucracy, a
    remoteness, and partly arrogance. A real co-determination of people,
    a participation of society failed. A comprehensive democratization
    or elimination of the old structures, or the creation of influential
    new ones, was missing or left in its infancy. A politicization and
    mobilization of the people who have brought about the changes of
    governments has failed or remained stuck in the sand. The Lessons of
    the fascist coup by Pinochet were not drawn.

5.  The old power structures of the repression apperates particularly
    the military and the police have been inherited (historically
    conditional exception in this case, Venezuela), not democratized and
    changed institutions, the majority of the population.

False compromises and Omissions understood oligarchic influence. The old
state apparatus was taken over and renewed only in small parts or
Parallel structures were built, some of which were not immune to
bureaucracy and corruption.

Changes within agriculture were completely inadequate, both in terms of
large-scale land ownership and the greening of Agriculture.

1.  Underestimation of hatred and the will of the old elites --- and
    especially of US imperialism, but also of the neo-colonial EU ---
    the neo-liberal constellations to recover. Let us not forget that
    the left-wing changes were possible when the US lost the Iraq War
    and had a strong political focus on the Middle East.

2.  The centuries-long Patriarchal power relations and their practical
    and ideological impacts have been underestimated, new structures
    were less respected, especially if they were built by women.

3.  500 years of colonialism were not sufficiently recognised in its
    comprehensive and long-term effects, so that the values of the
    global north were often more important, more significant and more
    influential. Buen vivir and Plurinationality received constitutional
    status, but were rarely associated with strategies of short - term
    and long-term realization as well as the need for cultural hegemony.

4.  Not observed, and in its brutal impact as an organised haven of
    counter-revolution, the Evangelical has been detected magnetism is
    much too late and much too little offensive combat. It was not about
    human rights and religious freedom, but about mental enslavement and
    neoliberal brainwashing under the guise of religious freedom.

5.  In part, discourses were canceled to alternative social development
    models. These models are based on a post-capitalist, non-profit
    society, overcoming extractivism, environmental degradation and
    authoritarianism. Common property and the importance of historically
    grown structures, cultures and forms of participation were often
    questioned in favour of a Western understanding of modernization.

6.  compared with Vietnam\'s solidarity and also with Cuba in the 1960s,
    there was a lack of the shaping and moving power of international
    solidarity, which could have limited negative changes. International
    solidarity involves the recognition Liebknecht, that the "enemy is
    in your own country".

The debate on these aspects is all the more urgent in view of the
massive protests and the resistance of the population in many countries.

What does that mean to us? Certainly at the moment: government
participation has nothing to do with social changes and overcoming power
structures. The lessons learned from the events in Latin America are
certainly also true for us: if capitalist power structures are attacked,
this will be a challenging Situation for the political and Social left.
