---
title: "The German theatre"
date: 2019-11-29
tags: "state"
shorttext: "The alleged Breitscheid-Assassin Anis Amri was built by the media as a villain, should his shooting prevent the thorough reprocessing of the attack?"
cover: "repression"
draft: false
lang: en
---

On 21 December 2016, two days after the alleged truck attack at a
Christmas market in Berlin, the media began building up the "terrorist
master Anis Amri". To this day, the media were able to publish very
detailed information about the alleged perpetrators. The channel CNN
boasted that he had already received a 345-page Dossier on Amri and his
friends from Germany. So the play Anis Amri was already finished. The
author of the play does not want to reveal his identity. Since then, one
act at a time, his Opus has been performed on the stages of
parliamentary committees. The actors are politicians. Leading media
accompany the spectacle with comments. A few days ago, there was a
dramatic new act in this drama. Who the spectacle is for? And what does
Anis Amri have to do with it at all?

Before dealing with the last act, it might make sense to recall some
basic facts about the Berlin event.

#### Indisputable Facts

1.  According to the official representation of anyone supposed to have
    a 40-tonne semi-trailer at a frantic pace in the crowd at a Berlin
    Christmas market driven. In this way, the perpetrator should have
    deliberately killed eleven people and injured more than 50 people.
    The alleged perpetrator escaped immediately from the crime scene. He
    is said to have been shot three days later, at night, in a suburb of
    Milan, by two police officers. He is called Anis Amri, a young
    Tunisian.

2.  Because the alleged perpetrator died, he could be charged and
    brought to court. The federal prosecutor\'s Office refers Amri on
    its website as the perpetrator, without his family or a lawyer could
    reprimand the claims of the authority. The comments of the authority
    are not a accusation, but a unilateral statement. Amri is therefore
    the innocent victim of a homicide. To describe him publicly as a
    murderer or Terrorist is a criminal offence as well as a violation
    of Articles 1, 2 and 13 of the German press code.

3.  There is no court proceeding against the Suspects are being held,
    there was no public awareness of the circumstances commonly found in
    the criminal proceedings is performed. The statements made by the
    state authorities on the Berlin event are therefore considered to be
    state truths. The US government\'s claim to Iraq\'s non-existent
    weapons of mass destruction is a well-known example of State truth.

4.  The Bundestag as a control organ of the Executive branch would
    normally have had to the failure of a court in proceedings against
    the Suspect by a Committee of inquiry to replace. This has been
    done, but only partially. Because the committee is not interested in
    the investigation of the alleged offence or what Anis Amri is
    subject to and actually took place at Breitscheidplatz on the
    evening of 19 December 2016. The committee requires, without
    reservation, the state truth about Anis Amri and focuses on alleged
    government failure.

5.  A lot of questions about the facts remained unanswered to this day.
    Here is just a small selection:

    - Did anyone see Anis Amri in Berlin or at Breitscheidplatz on 19 December 2016?

    - Could a 40-tonne and 16-metre-long Scania truck have ever travelled the 50-metre short route through the Christmas market at this frenzied speed, as is largely claimed?

    - Why did some witnesses claim that the truck had been ravaged by the Christmas market at a speed of between 60 and 80 kilometres per hour, while five journalists from the weekly newspaper reported on 5 April 2017 that the truck had stopped at a red light and then slipped into the Christmas market with only 15 kilometres per hour? After all, they referred to the data of the vehicle'S GPS device and not to subjective sensations. The truck is said to have slowed down its journey even further until it stopped after 50 meters. To date, no one has complained about the statements of these journalists.

    - Is the speed of a truck with a maximum of 15 kilometers per hour over a distance of 50 meters enough to kill eleven people and injure more than 50? Is there a precedent? What do accident studies say about the impact of a slow-moving vehicle on pedestrians?

    - Why do the investigation authorities not dare to indicate the exact and verifiable speed of the truck in the Christmas market?

    - Why don't the investigation authorities dare to specify the exact time of incident?

    - Why do not the investigation authorities dare to determine from what direction the truck came from?

    - Why was it first claimed that the truck's cab was found empty by the police, but later that the legitimate driver, Lukasz Urban, was found dead in the cab?

    - Why does an early picture and an early video recording of the crime scene show neither panic nor a lot of dead and injured?

    - Why came, none of the 15 stall operators to damage at the scene of the crime?

    - Why did a lady creep out of the rubble of a place completely unharmed?


{{< image srcwebp="/static/img/content/2019/272.webp" srcalt="/static/img/content/2019/272.jpg" title="No Panic please!" >}}

#### The purpose of acting

As many significant questions remain unanswered, it is clear that the
authorities are not interested in clarifying the facts of 19 December
2016. The refusal to answer the above questions cannot be explained by
failure of the authorities. In order to conceal this refusal, the public
is distracted by a spectacle about the "terrorist Anis Amri", in which
not only state officials, but also members of the Bundestag and other
interested parties play. One would like to know who is the director and
whether the director is in Germany or in the USA.

The last act of the act is a "explosive" statement by an anonymous chief
detective from North Rhine-Westphalia, who only appears as" M.\". On 14
November 2019, he is said to have accused the federal criminal office
and the Ministry of the interior of the federal committee of the
incredible devaluation of VP-01. According to M., This V-Man is supposed
to have possessed significant information about Amri. All the leading
media immediately turned to the side of anonymous and courageous
Commissioner M.

On 14 November, the FAZ spoke of its 'serious allegations', without
obtaining an opinion from the accused. The Süddeutsche Zeitung of 15
November described in Detail the statement of the anonymous police
commissioner, while the Ministry of the interior in response were
subjected to two words. Two journalists, who particularly promote the
legend Anis Amri, are trying to celebrate Commissioner M. as a brave
Scout. Florian Flade tells in the tagesschau.de from 15 November 2019:
"witness M. in the spring of 2016, the Federal Minister of the Interior,
Thomas de Maizière, and a senior BKA official, had urged a source of the
land Criminal Police Office (LKA) to make 'mundtot' in the radical
Islamist scene, of all the informants who had provided valuable
information about Amri."

Thomas Moser describes on 18. November 2019 heise.de the statement by M.
similarly: "in the investigation committee of the Bundestag, a criminal
officer from North Rhine-Westphalia reports on massive attempts by the
federal criminal office and the Federal Ministry of the interior to
extract a source from Amri."The Anis Amri was surrounded by many
V-people is long known. However, this has nothing to do with whether he
actually managed or managed to control a frenzied truck into the Berlin
crowd on 19 December 2016.

With the statement of Commissioner M., once again the Drama is
introduced into the boring spectacle "Anis Amri and his friends". The
audience is now eagerly awaiting the defense of the Ministry of Interior
and the federal criminal office. Because the people prefer such games
sober facts, you can look forward to more acts of this drama.

But what is the meaning of this game? We know the method of petty
criminals: two accomplices simulate a quarrel next to the Stand of a
street dealer, drawing the dealer\'s attention, while the third
accomplice is stealing the goods.

The diversion of Anis Amri is staged as a dispute between authorities.
The highlight is what appears in the Text or in the Subtext, but not
particularly noticeable, namely the assumption that Anis Amri was "the
perpetrator" of an attack in Berlin. This state truth seems to have to
be hammered over and over again into the minds of consumers so that they
do not fall into conspiracy theories like those of a certain Davidson.

#### Similarities to attacks in England, France, India and the USA

The Bundestag is not the only instance that performs plays like the
above. They are often performed by so-called democratic parliaments
after terrorist attacks that stage their governments themselves. The
best documented example of this is the play by the 9/11 Investigation
Commission. Just like the committee of the Bundestag, the 9/11
Commission had to assume the state truth for its investigation, namely
that the USA was attacked from abroad. The commission could not question
this basic assumption. The official fairy tale by Ali Baba bin Laden and
his 19 youngsters, who Austrian Air Force with small knives on September
11, 2001, is now part of the second volume of the stories of Baron
Münchhausen. The commission only had to explain and explain the failure
of the authorities.

Similarly, the official commission of inquiry into the London attacks of
7 July 2005 did not want to allow a parliamentary commission on this
event by the then prime minister, Tony Blair. After the attacks in
Mumbai in November 2008, the Indian federal government established a
commission consisting of two politicians, R. Pradhan and V.
Balachandran. These conducted their investigation behind closed doors.
Your report largely refers to the role and failure of the police and
neglects many critical aspects of the events. In France, a parliamentary
commission was established to investigate the various attacks from 2012
to 2016. However, it was not allowed to investigate the facts, because
this is the task of the investigation authorities. The commission held
numerous meetings and heard dozens of government officials, but invited
only a single, deranged eyewitness to testify.

The event in Berlin also bears witness to further similarities with
other terrorist attacks. With almost all the "Islamist" attacks I
know-except those that take place in competitive areas such as Iraq,
Syria, Afghanistan, Nigeria, Libya or Yemen-the alleged perpetrators die
without the presence of eyewitnesses under dubious circumstances. This
is, among other things, the alleged perpetrators of the attacks of New
York City and Washington D.C. on 11. In two known cases, Mumbai 2008 and
Boston 2013, one of the alleged perpetrators survived after a failed
execution by the police. Both were sentenced to death after a trial.

The death of the" perpetrators \" freed the relevant authorities from
their burden of proving their guilt in court. Thus, the state truth is
not subjected to any public examination.

Instead, the state truth is proclaimed and unmasked by useful media. We
are told that some of the suspects have killed themselves, but this is
also a state truth that we cannot verify. Even if the police or special
forces shoot suspects, they will not release the uneasy suspicion that
they will be executed, so that they will not testify about their
relations with secret services.

A third common denominator between Berlin and other "terrorist attacks"
is the political exploitation of the event. After each attack,
governments can once again take measures to further develop a police
state: restrictions on the privacy of citizens by means of massive
surveillance of all areas of life and a control of political attitudes.
Other measures, which are also legitimized by "attacks", are the
militarization of the police, their preparation for urban struggles,
extended powers to arrests and so on. Criminal law mutates into a moral
justice system. Foreign operations are legitimised in the name of the
"fight against international terrorism". You defend "the safety of the
inhabitants of the Federal Republic of Hindu Kush".

The fiction of international terrorism is an excellent illustration of
many anti-democratic and anti-international measures that the population
would not support under normal circumstances. The fact that
international terrorism is a fiction should now be regarded as a false
truth, at least if you research it yourself. In Europe with more than
700 million inhabitants, an average of 44 people die each year in
terrorist attacks, less than those struck by lightning! Anyone who
believes that terrorism represents a serious threat to any country in
the world, may apply to the BKA.

#### Hypothesis to Think about ... {#hypothesis-to-think-about-}

If the Berlin event had been a case of genuine Islamist terrorism, there
would be no reason for the described secrecy. This would only be useful
if the official presentation of the event were false and the Operation
in Berlin had been a contract work of the German state. The darkening of
the murders to Uwe Mundlos, Uwe Böhnhardt, Michèle Kiesewetter and
Florian Heilig in the case of NSU, in which lawyers of the General
Confederation, BKA bosses, police presidents, legal practitioners and
politics participate.

The specter of global "Islamic terrorism" was built in the 90s as a
strategic and stable replacement for the "Communist danger", which has
more than 40 years, the unity of the transatlantic Alliance, NATO, and
the Power of the industrial military complex was. In order to ensure the
fear of the new enemy, attacks that can be attributed to Islamists must
be committed from time to time. Operation 9/11 officially launched the
new enemy image of humanity. All States were required to combat the new
enemy.

Germany was pushed by the USA or NATO for the Operation
Breitscheidplatz, because no significant "Islamist attack" had taken
place on German soil?

France, the United Kingdom, Spain and Denmark have already fulfilled
their task of maintaining the fiction of international terrorism through
successful attacks, but not Germany. Perhaps Mrs Merkel will tell us
something about the background of the Berlin event in her retirement.
Perhaps...

For the source see the [original german post](https://silviosiefke.de/blog/2019/11/29/schauspiel-im-bundestheater/ "Original Source in German Post").
